Virtual Console for Modern Pokecrystal (#882)
pret/pokecrystal: docs/vc_patch.md

# Nintendo 2DS/3DS Virtual Console Patch

> The Nintendo Virtual Console for the 2DS and 3DS can play Game Boy Color ROMs bundled into a `.cia` (CTR Importable Archive) file. Creating a `.cia` file for a `.gbc` ROM file is outside the scope of this project.
> 
> An optional file bundled in the `.cia` archive is a `.patch` file with the same name as the `.gbc` file, used to determine when and under what conditions to enable certain Virtual Console functionalities, such as the Wireless Link capabilities. It also allows arbitrary content in the ROM to be modified, such as for disabling the Game Boy Printer features of Pokémon Crystal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Nintendo Virtual Console is an emulator for the Nintendo 2DS and 3DS consoles that runs (among others) Game Boy Color titles, while applying enhancements to some titles.

A `.patch` file is shipped within the emulator, which is used to determine when and under what conditions to enable certain enhancements, such as the Wireless Link capabilities used to replicate the original Link Cable functionality. It also allows arbitrary content in the ROM to be modified, such as for disabling the Game Boy Printer features of Pokémon Crystal.
```

Or something like this, we don't really need to explain neither the distribution format (`.cia`, this isn't even how it's stored on the nintendo servers, it's mainly used by developers), nor how the internal structure of the file looks (who cares what the files are called).

Reviewer 2: > A `.patch` file is shipped within the emulator

It's within the .cia file though, not the emulator, right? That's the point of being able to generate valid .patch files even if you've changed the values of `FISSURE`, `wMenuJoypad`, etc: you can bundle your hack's .gbc and .patch in a .cia file and have the VC enhancements for Crystal still work. I think that much detail is needed in the explanation so people know what to do with the `make` output.

Reviewer 2: I've made some edits based on your comment.

Reviewer: > It's within the .cia file though, not the emulator, right?

Yeah sorry, I meant "shipped with".

## Build pokecrystal11_vc.patch

To build **pokecrystal11_vc.patch**:

```bash
make crystal11_vc
```

> This will also create two ROM files, **pokecrystal11.gbc** and **pokecrystal11_vc.gbc**. The pokecrystal11_vc.gbc file has the patches already applied to it. Do *not* use this file; rename pokecrystal11_vc.patch to **pokecrystal11.patch** and bundle it together with pokecrystal11.gbc in a `.cia` file.

Reviewer: "Do *not* use this file; the pokecrystal11_vc.patch file will apply its changes on top of the original pokecrystal11.gbc file. These two files should be renamed to match, and always be used together."

Reviewer: I wonder if we should fix this within the Makefile though. Why not output pokecrystal11.patch instead of 11_vc.patch?

Reviewer 2: I'll try that.

## vc/pokecrystal11_vc.constants.asm

> The `.constants.asm` file is used to create a `.constants.sym` file. Typical `.sym` files only list the values of *labels* (ROM banks and addresses); this file is used to list *constants* that are needed by the patch template. Any constants that the patch template needs must be explicitly printed here with the `vc_const` macro.

Reviewer: (opinion)
This is a generated file. It's ok to document it I guess, but it's not really something the user needs to be aware of. Document this in the code that generates it, I'd say.

Reviewer 2: The .constants.asm file is commented, but I think it's useful to reiterate about it here, because someone making edits could easily miss adding different constants to the .asm file.

Reviewer: Oh, I mistook this one for the generated one. Nevermind, then.

Commands are interpreted with a series of arguments, separated by whitespace (spaces, tabs, or newlines). Leading and trailing whitespace is ignored; for example, "`{  hex  @  4  }`" is interpreted the same as "`{hex @ 4}`".

**Arguments** evaluate to numeric values. They may be any of the following:

- Literal numbers in decimal (base 10, e.g. "`42`"), hexadecimal (base 16, e.g. "`0x2a`"), or octal (base 8, e.g. "`052`"). They may start with a plus sign "`+`". Numbers may not be negative.
- Comparison operators: "`==`" is 0, "`>`" is 1, "`<`" is 2, "`>=`" is 3, "`<=`" is 4, "`!=`" is 5, and "`||`" is 0x11.
- Symbol names from the two `.sym` files provided to `make_patch` may evaluate as their bank-relative address, or their absolute offset in the ROM, depending on the command. They may also be followed by a plus sign and a literal number that gets added to the value.
- "`@`" evaluates as the address or absolute offset of the current patch label.

Any other characters are output as-is.

## Patch template commands

### `patch`, `PATCH`, `patch_`, or `PATCH_`

> Seeks the patched ROM contents between the current patch label, and the label which is the current patch label plus "`_End`". Outputs the bytes between those labels as a hexadecimal number "<code>0x<i>V</i></code>" for only one byte, or as a *value series* "<code>a<i>N</i>: <i>V1</i> <i>V2</i> [...] <i>VN</i></code>" for multiple bytes.

Reviewer: It seeks between `vc_patch` and `vc_patch_end`, comparing the differences between the "patched" and "unpatched" roms. Maybe we should explain why two roms are generated and what the difference between a hook and a patch is in a "concepts" section.

An optional argument is an *offset* to add to the current patch label before gathering the contents between it and the end label.

> If the command name is all lowercase, the byte values use lowercase for hexadecimal digits A-F; if it is all uppercase, they use uppercase. If the command name ends in an underscore, a space is output after the colon preceding the values; if not, then it is not.

Reviewer: This (or a different section, maybe the "concepts" section mentioned above) should explain why the different command names exist.

(opinion)
I would also just explain 1 format for each command (i.e. only mention and explain the lowercase one, make sure to include an example), while listing the rest along with the explanation of why they exist.

For example, if "`{patch}`" outputs "`a3:ab cd ef`", then "`{PATCH_ 1}`" outputs "`a2: CD EF`", and "`{patch 2}`" outputs "`0xef`".

Converting the patch template will print a warning if any differences exist between the original and patched ROMs, which are not covered by "`patch`" commands.

### `dws`, `DWS`, `dws_`, or `DWS_`

> Outputs the alternating low and high bytes of its arguments as a value series.

Reviewer: Outputs a hexadecimal string containing the values of its arguments, in 16 bit little-endian.

Reviewer: Maybe not the best proposal but "hexadecimal", "16 bit"/"word"/"two-byte" and "little-endian" are keywords here.

Symbol names or "`@`" are evaluated as their relative address.

If the command name is all lowercase, the byte values use lowercase; if it is all uppercase, they use uppercase. If the command name ends in an underscore, a space is output after the colon; if not, then it is not.

> For example, if "`{dws_ 42 0xabcd wCurSpecies}`" outputs "`a6: 2a 00 cd ab 60 cf`", then "`{DWS >= wCurSpecies+3}`" outputs "`a4:04 00 63 cf`".

Reviewer: The latter example isn't uppercase.

### `db`, `DB`, `db_`, or `DB_`

> Outputs its argument as a single-byte value series.

Reviewer: Outputs its arguments as a hexadecimal string of single-byte values.

Reviewer: Maybe not the best proposal but "hexadecimal" and "single-byte"/"8 bit" are keywords here.
